---
license: |
   Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
   contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
   this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
   The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
   (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
   the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
   
           http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   
   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
layout: publication
title: Publication
subtitle: >
   ML-based Cross-Platform Query Optimization
link-name: ICDE 2020
img-thumb: assets/img/screenshot/rheem.png
authors: Zoi Kaoudi, Jorge-Arnulfo Quiané-Ruiz, Bertty Contreras-Rojas, Rodrigo Pardo-Meza, Anis Troudi and Sanjay Chawla
year: 2020
month: 04
day: 20
link-paper: assets/pdf/paper/icde20.pdf
link-external: false
---

Cost-based optimization is widely known to suffer from a major weakness: administrators spend a significant amount of time to tune the associated cost models. This problem only gets exacerbated in cross-platform settings as there are many more parameters that need to be tuned. In the era of machine learning(ML), the first step to remedy this problem is to replace the cost model of the optimizer with an ML model. However, such a solution brings in two major challenges. First, the optimizer has to transform a query plan to a vector million times during plan enumeration incurring a very high overhead. Second, a lot of training data is required to effectively train the ML model.We overcome these challenges in Robopt, a novel vector-based optimizer we have built for Rheem, a cross-platform system. Robopt not only uses an ML model to prune the search space but also bases the entire plan enumeration on a set of algebraic operations that operate on vectors, which are a natural fit to the ML model. This leads to both speed-up and scale-up of the enumeration process by exploiting modern CPUs via vectorization. We also accompany Robopt with a scalable training data generator for building its ML model. Our evaluation shows that (i) the vector-based approach is more efficient and scalable than simply using an ML model and (ii) Robopt matches and, in some cases, improves Rheem’s cost-based optimizer in choosing good plans without requiring any tuning effort.Index  Terms—query optimization, machine learning, cross-platform data processing, polystores.
